docs/cluster_howto/access-external-ssh.rst, before:

Using SSH tunnel
****************

A SSH gateway named ``ssh.dccn.nl`` is provided for setting the SSH tunnels. When setting up a tunnel for connecting to a target service behind the firewall, one needs to choose a local network port that is still free for use on your desktop/laptop (i.e. the ``Source port``) and provides the network endpoint (i.e. the ``Destination``) referring to the target service.

.. tip::
    This technique can also be applied for accessing different services protected by the DCCN firewall.

.. contents:: Contents
    :local:

Instructions in video
=====================

The following screencast will guide you through the steps of accessing the cluster via the SSH tunnel.

.. raw:: html

    <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/mdEnaDrpux8" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Putty login via SSH tunnel
==========================

In this example, we choose ``Source port`` to be ``8022``.  The ``Destination`` referring to the SSH server on mentat001 should be ``mentat001:22``.

Follow the steps below to establish the tunnel for SSH connection:

#. start putty on the Windows desktop

   .. figure:: figures/start_putty.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. configure putty for connecting to the SSH gateway ``ssh.fcdonders.nl``

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_gateway_setup.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. configure putty to initiate a local port ``8022`` for forwarding connections to ``mentat001:22``

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_for_ssh.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. login the gateway with your username and password to establish the tunnel

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_gateway_login.png
      :figwidth: 60%

Once you have logged in the gateway, you should keep the login window open; and make another SSH connection to the local port as follows:

#. start another putty on the Windows desktop

   .. figure:: figures/start_putty.png
       :figwidth: 60%

#. configure putty for connecting to ``localhost`` on port ``8022``.  This is the port we initiated when establishing the tunnel.

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_login_via_tunnel.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. login with your username and password

   .. figure:: figures/putty_login_username_password.png
       :figwidth: 60%

#. get the virtual terminal with a shell prompt.  You should see the hostname ``mentat001`` showing on the prompt.

   .. figure:: figures/putty_login_success.png
      :figwidth: 60%

VNC via SSH tunnel (Windows)
============================

In this example, we choose ``Source port`` to be ``5956``.  We also assume that a VNC server has been started on ``mentat002`` with the display number ``56``. The ``Destination`` referring to the VNC server should be ``mentat002:5956``.

.. note::
    The display number ``56`` is just an example.  In reality, you should replace it with a different number assigned by the *vncmanager*.  Nevertheless, the network port number is always the display number plus ``5900``.

Follow the steps below to establish the tunnel for VNC connection:

#. start putty on the Windows desktop

   .. figure:: figures/start_putty.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. configure putty for connecting to the SSH gateway ``ssh.fcdonders.nl``

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_gateway_setup.png
      :figwidth: 60% 

#. configure putty to initiate a local port ``5956`` for forwarding connections to ``mentat002:5956``

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_for_vnc.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. login the gateway with your username and password to establish the tunnel

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_gateway_login.png
      :figwidth: 60%

Once you have logged in the gateway, you should keep the login window open; and maken a VNC client connection to the local port as follows:

#. open the TigerVNC application

   .. figure:: figures/start_tigerVNC.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. enter the display endpoint (``localhost:5956``) as the VNC server

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_via_tunnel.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. enter the authentication password you set via the ``vncpasswd`` command

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_auth.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. get the graphical desktop of the access node

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_success.png
      :figwidth: 60%

VNC via SSH tunnel (Linux/Mac OSX)
==================================

In this example, we choose ``Source port`` to be ``5956``.  We also assume that a VNC server has been started on ``mentat002`` with the display number ``56``. The ``Destination`` referring to the VNC server should be ``mentat002:5956``.

.. note::
    The display number ``56`` is just an example.  In reality, you should replace it with a different number assigned by the *vncmanager*.  Nevertheless, the network port number is always the display number plus ``5900``.

Follow the steps below to establish the tunnel for VNC connection:

#. open a terminal application

   On Linux, this can be either `gnome-terminal` on GNOME desktop environment, `xfce4-terminal` on the XFCE4, or `konsole` of the KDE.  On Mac, the `Terminal` app can be found in the `Other` group under the app lanchpad.
   
#. set up the SSH tunnel

   Use the following command to create the SSH tunnel.  Note that the ``$`` sign is just an indication of your terminal prompt, it is not the part of the command.  The username ``xxxyyy`` should also be your actual DCCN account name in practice.
   
   .. code:: bash
      
      $ ssh -L 5956:mentat002:5956 xxxyyy@ssh.dccn.nl
      
   A screenshot below shows an example:
   
   .. figure:: figures/terminal_ssh_tunnel.png
      :figwidth: 60%
   
   Once the connect is set, you should leave the terminal open.  If you close the terminal, the tunnel is also closed.  You can now make a connection to your VNC session through this SSH tunnel.
   
#. open the TigerVNC application

   .. figure:: figures/start_tigerVNC_macosx.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. enter the display endpoint (``localhost:5956``) as the VNC server

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_via_tunnel_macosx.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. enter the authentication password you set via the ``vncpasswd`` command

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_auth_macosx.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. get the graphical desktop of the access node

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_success_macosx.png
      :figwidth: 60%

Commit message:

added note for tunnel2vnc script

docs/cluster_howto/access-external-ssh.rst, after:

Using SSH tunnel
****************

A SSH gateway named ``ssh.dccn.nl`` is provided for setting the SSH tunnels. When setting up a tunnel for connecting to a target service behind the firewall, one needs to choose a local network port that is still free for use on your desktop/laptop (i.e. the ``Source port``) and provides the network endpoint (i.e. the ``Destination``) referring to the target service.

.. tip::
    This technique can also be applied for accessing different services protected by the DCCN firewall.

.. contents:: Contents
    :local:

Instructions in video
=====================

The following screencast will guide you through the steps of accessing the cluster via the SSH tunnel.

.. raw:: html

    <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/mdEnaDrpux8" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Putty login via SSH tunnel
==========================

In this example, we choose ``Source port`` to be ``8022``.  The ``Destination`` referring to the SSH server on mentat001 should be ``mentat001:22``.

Follow the steps below to establish the tunnel for SSH connection:

#. start putty on the Windows desktop

   .. figure:: figures/start_putty.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. configure putty for connecting to the SSH gateway ``ssh.fcdonders.nl``

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_gateway_setup.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. configure putty to initiate a local port ``8022`` for forwarding connections to ``mentat001:22``

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_for_ssh.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. login the gateway with your username and password to establish the tunnel

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_gateway_login.png
      :figwidth: 60%

Once you have logged in the gateway, you should keep the login window open; and make another SSH connection to the local port as follows:

#. start another putty on the Windows desktop

   .. figure:: figures/start_putty.png
       :figwidth: 60%

#. configure putty for connecting to ``localhost`` on port ``8022``.  This is the port we initiated when establishing the tunnel.

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_login_via_tunnel.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. login with your username and password

   .. figure:: figures/putty_login_username_password.png
       :figwidth: 60%

#. get the virtual terminal with a shell prompt.  You should see the hostname ``mentat001`` showing on the prompt.

   .. figure:: figures/putty_login_success.png
      :figwidth: 60%

VNC via SSH tunnel (Windows)
============================

In this example, we choose ``Source port`` to be ``5956``.  We also assume that a VNC server has been started on ``mentat002`` with the display number ``56``. The ``Destination`` referring to the VNC server should be ``mentat002:5956``.

.. note::
    The display number ``56`` is just an example.  In reality, you should replace it with a different number assigned by the *vncmanager*.  Nevertheless, the network port number is always the display number plus ``5900``.

Follow the steps below to establish the tunnel for VNC connection:

#. start putty on the Windows desktop

   .. figure:: figures/start_putty.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. configure putty for connecting to the SSH gateway ``ssh.fcdonders.nl``

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_gateway_setup.png
      :figwidth: 60% 

#. configure putty to initiate a local port ``5956`` for forwarding connections to ``mentat002:5956``

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_for_vnc.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. login the gateway with your username and password to establish the tunnel

   .. figure:: figures/putty_ssh_tunnel_gateway_login.png
      :figwidth: 60%

Once you have logged in the gateway, you should keep the login window open; and maken a VNC client connection to the local port as follows:

#. open the TigerVNC application

   .. figure:: figures/start_tigerVNC.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. enter the display endpoint (``localhost:5956``) as the VNC server

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_via_tunnel.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. enter the authentication password you set via the ``vncpasswd`` command

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_auth.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. get the graphical desktop of the access node

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_success.png
      :figwidth: 60%

VNC via SSH tunnel (Linux/Mac OSX)
==================================

.. note::
   A simple script wrapping up the steps below can be found `here <_static/tunnel2vnc/tunnel2vnc.sh>`_.  Use the command below to download and run the script to setup the SSH tunnel:

   .. code:: bash

      $ 
      $ chmod +x /usr/local/bin/tunnel2vnc
      $ tunnel2vnc

In this example, we choose ``Source port`` to be ``5956``.  We also assume that a VNC server has been started on ``mentat002`` with the display number ``56``. The ``Destination`` referring to the VNC server should be ``mentat002:5956``.

.. note::
   The display number ``56`` is just an example.  In reality, you should replace it with a different number assigned by the *vncmanager*.  Nevertheless, the network port number is always the display number plus ``5900``.

Follow the steps below to establish the tunnel for VNC connection:

#. open a terminal application

   On Linux, this can be either `gnome-terminal` on GNOME desktop environment, `xfce4-terminal` on the XFCE4, or `konsole` of the KDE.  On Mac, the `Terminal` app can be found in the `Other` group under the app lanchpad.
   
#. set up the SSH tunnel

   Use the following command to create the SSH tunnel.  Note that the ``$`` sign is just an indication of your terminal prompt, it is not the part of the command.  The username ``xxxyyy`` should also be your actual DCCN account name in practice.
   
   .. code:: bash
      
      $ ssh -L 5956:mentat002:5956 xxxyyy@ssh.dccn.nl
      
   A screenshot below shows an example:
   
   .. figure:: figures/terminal_ssh_tunnel.png
      :figwidth: 60%
   
   Once the connect is set, you should leave the terminal open.  If you close the terminal, the tunnel is also closed.  You can now make a connection to your VNC session through this SSH tunnel.
   
#. open the TigerVNC application

   .. figure:: figures/start_tigerVNC_macosx.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. enter the display endpoint (``localhost:5956``) as the VNC server

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_via_tunnel_macosx.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. enter the authentication password you set via the ``vncpasswd`` command

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_auth_macosx.png
      :figwidth: 60%

#. get the graphical desktop of the access node

   .. figure:: figures/tigerVNC_success_macosx.png
      :figwidth: 60%
