docs/cluster_howto/genai/ollama.rst, before:

.. _genai_ollama:

Ollama
******

`Ollama <https://ollama.com>`__ is an open-source GenAI engine for running the large-language models built upon `Llama <https://llama.com>`__.  It offers an opportunity to run GenAI engine on-premises to avoid data security and privacy concerns with Cloud-based engines.

This guide will show you how to run an ollama server on the HPC cluster serving the `codellama <https://ai.meta.com/blog/code-llama-large-language-model-coding/>`__ model, and use it as a coding assisstent.

Running Ollama server with a slurm job
======================================

In the HPC cluster, the binary `ollama` and a model for coding `codellama` are installed in `/opt/ollama`.

User can start a ollama server using the script `/opt/ollama/ollama_serve.sh` using the command below:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ module load ollama
    $ sbatch --time=1:00:00 /opt/ollama/ollama_serve.sh

The job requests 1 CPU, 1GPU and 64GB memory resource to run on, and for 1 hour.  Once the job is started, check the output file ``ollama-gpu-{jobid}.out`` and find the server endpoint.

The example below shows you the OLLAMA job ``46131868`` is started and listen on endpoint ``dccn-c083.dccn.nl:11434``.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ cat ollama-gpu-46131868.out
    ...
    starting OLLAMA to listen on dccn-c083.dccn.nl:11434 ...
    ...

.. note::
    As the started server is capable for serving multiple clients at the same time, it is possible to use the same server endpoint in multiple clients as long as the client can access the DCCN network (e.g. via `eduVPN Trigon full access profile <https://intranet.donders.ru.nl/index.php?id=eduvpn>`__).

Connecting clients to the OLLAMA server
=======================================

On the access node, open a new terminal and run

.. code-block:: bash

    $ module load ollama
    $ OLLAMA_HOST=dccn-c083.dccn.nl:11434 ollama run codellama

It can take a while when the server is loading the model.  Once succeeded, you should get a "chat" prompt back as below:

.. code-block::

    >>> Send a message (/? for help)

Now you can chat with the model just like using the ChatGPT, for example,

.. code-block::

    >>> hello

    Hey there! How's it going?

    >>> who are you?

    I am LLaMA, an AI assistant developed by Meta AI that can understand and respond to human input in a
    conversational manner. I am trained on a massive dataset of text from the internet and can answer questions
    or provide information on a wide range of topics.

Connecting VSCode to the OLLAMA server
======================================

On VSCode IDE, one can install the plugin `Continue <https://www.continue.dev/>`__ to connect to the OLLAMA server.

After the installation, the Continue panel is accessible via the :kbd:`Ctrl/Cmd` + :kbd:`l` key-binding.  Before starting using it, one needs to configure the model provider endpoint as follows:

#. open the Continue configuration file, see `this instruction <https://docs.continue.dev/customize/overview#editing-configjson>`__.

#. given the ollama server endpoint ``dccn-c083.dccn.nl:11434`` and the ``codellama`` model, we modify the configuration JSON file accordingly as below:

    .. code-block:: JSON

        {
            "models": [
                {
                "title": "Code Llama",
                "provider": "ollama",
                "apiBase": "http://dccn-c083.dccn.nl:11434",
                "model": "codellama"
                }
            ],
            ...
        }

After that, in the Continue chat pannel toggled with the :kbd:`Ctrl/Cmd` + :kbd:`l` key-binding, you can start chatting with the model.

Commit message:

added note for switching between llama models

docs/cluster_howto/genai/ollama.rst, after:

.. _genai_ollama:

Ollama
******

`Ollama <https://ollama.com>`__ is an open-source GenAI engine for running the large-language models built upon `Llama <https://llama.com>`__.  It offers an opportunity to run GenAI engine on-premises to avoid data security and privacy concerns with Cloud-based engines.

This guide will show you how to run an ollama server on the HPC cluster serving the `codellama <https://ai.meta.com/blog/code-llama-large-language-model-coding/>`__ model, and use it as a coding assisstent.

Running Ollama server with a slurm job
======================================

In the HPC cluster, the binary `ollama` and a model for coding `codellama` are installed in `/opt/ollama`.

User can start a ollama server using the script `/opt/ollama/ollama_serve.sh` using the command below:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ module load ollama
    $ sbatch --time=1:00:00 /opt/ollama/ollama_serve.sh

The job requests 1 CPU, 1GPU and 64GB memory resource to run on, and for 1 hour.  Once the job is started, check the output file ``ollama-gpu-{jobid}.out`` and find the server endpoint.

The example below shows you the OLLAMA job ``46131868`` is started and listen on endpoint ``dccn-c083.dccn.nl:11434``.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ cat ollama-gpu-46131868.out
    ...
    starting OLLAMA to listen on dccn-c083.dccn.nl:11434 ...
    ...

.. note::
    As the started server is capable for serving multiple clients at the same time, it is possible to use the same server endpoint in multiple clients as long as the client can access the DCCN network (e.g. via `eduVPN Trigon full access profile <https://intranet.donders.ru.nl/index.php?id=eduvpn>`__).

Connecting clients to the OLLAMA server
=======================================

On the access node, open a new terminal and run

.. code-block:: bash

    $ module load ollama
    $ OLLAMA_HOST=dccn-c083.dccn.nl:11434 ollama run codellama

.. note::
    The command above requests the Ollama server to load the model ``codellama``.  A list of available models can be found using the command below:

    .. code-block:: bash

        $ OLLAMA_HOST=dccn-c083.dccn.nl:11434 ollama list
        NAME                ID              SIZE      MODIFIED     
        deepseek-r1:14b     ea35dfe18182    9.0 GB    14 hours ago    
        codellama:13b       9f438cb9cd58    7.4 GB    39 hours ago    
        llama3.3:latest     a6eb4748fd29    42 GB     39 hours ago    
        codellama:latest    8fdf8f752f6e    3.8 GB    4 months ago

    When selecting a model, pay attention to the ``SIZE`` of the model.  It should fit in the total GPU memories (the GPU memory is part of the GPU model, it is **NOT** the ``--mem`` of the job request) of the job that starts the Ollama server.

It can take a while when the server is loading the model.  Once succeeded, you should get a "chat" prompt back as below:

.. code-block::

    >>> Send a message (/? for help)

Now you can chat with the model just like using the ChatGPT, for example,

.. code-block::

    >>> hello

    Hey there! How's it going?

    >>> who are you?

    I am LLaMA, an AI assistant developed by Meta AI that can understand and respond to human input in a
    conversational manner. I am trained on a massive dataset of text from the internet and can answer questions
    or provide information on a wide range of topics.

Connecting VSCode to the OLLAMA server
======================================

On VSCode IDE, one can install the plugin `Continue <https://www.continue.dev/>`__ to connect to the OLLAMA server.

After the installation, the Continue panel is accessible via the :kbd:`Ctrl/Cmd` + :kbd:`l` key-binding.  Before starting using it, one needs to configure the model provider endpoint as follows:

#. open the Continue configuration file, see `this instruction <https://docs.continue.dev/customize/overview#editing-configjson>`__.

#. given the ollama server endpoint ``dccn-c083.dccn.nl:11434`` and the ``codellama`` model, we modify the configuration JSON file accordingly as below:

    .. code-block:: JSON

        {
            "models": [
                {
                "title": "Code Llama",
                "provider": "ollama",
                "apiBase": "http://dccn-c083.dccn.nl:11434",
                "model": "codellama"
                }
            ],
            ...
        }

After that, in the Continue chat pannel toggled with the :kbd:`Ctrl/Cmd` + :kbd:`l` key-binding, you can start chatting with the model.
